## This is a response to Post 1 : What is Being a Data Scientist about vs  a Statistician. 

I think that being a data scientist is about viewing data analysis and the components that produce the data in a comprehensive way that is geared towards improving business processes. While there are parallels between being a data scientist and a statistician (such as the use of calculus, probability, linear algebra, statistics for forecasting and programming methods to analyze data) that exist, there are some differences that distinguish the two fields. Some of the largest differences are in the depth of involvement with the data preparation process, the methods of model utilization, and the objective of the data analysis.


Some of the main tasks data scientists assume involve the production of data to use for analysis.  This involves the process of collecting and cleaning large amounts of data (also known as “big data”) from multiple sources (traditionally structured such as plain text numerical data from databases or unstructured such as images, plots, and videos) so that there is a wealth of credible and beneficial knowledge to use during the analysis process. These preparation processes are done through methods such as collecting data from images, graphs, social media posts or videos and converting it to quantitative and structured forms that can be used for modelling. They also include the utilization of programming language, like SQL PYTHON, or R, to extract tables from large databases that are already in a structured form. This can differ with the field of statistics in the sense that much of the data that statisticians use has already been cleaned and provided in a structured format- ready to be analyzed- or there is minimal cleaning that is involved for the data, and most of the analysis and data manipulation is done in SAS or R programming languages. Thus, statisticians have a less involved and comprehensive role in the mechanics of preparation and production of the data itself, although they could be involved in the practices and experiments that create the initial data (such as designing sampling surveys and experiments for sampling data). 


After the data has been cleaned and collected, data science uses mathematical and statistical tools that are geared towards modelling, forecasting, and presenting data that provides insights for profitable and results-driven business practices. Thus, the objective of data analysis is geared towards maintaining dominance and/or competitiveness in a business industry. This includes producing clear and concise data visualizations that stakeholders can pull insights from, and focusing more on computer science, machine learning and software engineering methods to compile and analyze data.  Whereas, in the field of statistics, much of the focus of the data done from a scientific/ academic and research standpoint in which statisticians are working in either government, research centers, or academia and the objective is to try to explain a phenomenon and investigate a hypothesis- more so for policy implications or for research journals than for business practices.


During the analysis phase, data scientists often build models out of the data that is available, which can be a contrast to statisticians who often used established statistical models for analyzing a data set. Statisticians often go through rigorous lengths to find a model that provides the best fit for the trend that the data presents, and uses the statistical tools, theories, and assumptions surrounding the model to analyze the data. Data scientists also use statistical methods and theories to analyze data, however, they also create and use algorithms and methods such as supervised clustering, and machine learning to extract data, learn the patterns of the data, and then forecast future patterns that the data might follow. This does not have to follow a particular established distribution, as the algorithms are built to get a solid gauge on the patterns of the data. However, statistical practices such as probability and statistics serve as the foundation for the ways that many of the machine learning algorithms function. 


I see myself and my work as in between data science and statistics.  Some of what I do on a daily basis involves collecting data from different sources (more so from different structured sources as opposed to unstructured ones), and using models that have been created (not necessarily established statistical models, but mathematical models) to produce reports and analyze revenue and volume -based product data. Further, ensuring that the data is accurate and in a readable format (using the mathematical and statistical models to combine and interpret the data) for my part of the group report is a large part of my job. This touches a lot on the data science side. However, there are times where statistical practices such as observing and investigating possible sources of variation in the data, and using statistical tools such as maximum likelihood and looking at moments such as mean and variance to identify exploratory analysis aspects of the data are used. this is more of the statistician side. I would like to get more experience in in-depth analysis in both data science and statistics - on the data science side, learning about machine learning, and creating models out of data, and from the statistics side, designing surveys and experiments, and then later using mathematical statistics to analyze the patterns that the data follow to be able to forecast.
